Fvoxedit -- Festival diphone database editor
============================================

Fvoxedit is a program extending the Snd sound editor with functions for editing
Festival diphone databases.  It can be typically used in the process of
creation and debugging of a new Festival diphone voice.

While Fvoxedit has been being successfully used for editing the Czech diphone
database, it isn't tested by many users.  So you should expect bugs and user
interface inconveniences.  You can send bug reports, questions and suggestions
to the e-mail address given at the end of this file.  Patches are especially
welcome.

* Installation

First you must have installed the Snd sound editor.  Fvoxedit was tested with
Snd 7.8, it doesn't work with some older versions.

Then copy this directory somewhere in the Snd load path and name it `fvoxedit'.
Alternatively, you can just name it `fvoxedit' and put it in ANY-DIRECTORY and
then put the following line into your ~/.snd file:

  (set! %load-path (cons "ANY-DIRECTORY" %load-path))

In any case, add the following lines to your ~/.snd:

  (load-from-path "fvoxedit/snd-exports.scm")
  (use-modules (fvoxedit snd-fvoxedit)
               (fvoxedit snd-splitter)
               (fvoxedit festival))
  
* Configuration

Configuration values are set to reasonable defaults, so you needn't change most
of them initially.  But unless you run Fvoxedit directly in the database
directory and your dic file is named dic/diph.est, you must set the following
configuration variables in your ~/.snd file (replace `...'  with the path to
your diphone database and `dic/diph.est' with the actual name of your dic file):

  (set! *voice-directory* "...")
  (set! *diphone-dic-file* "dic/diph.est")

Additionally, you can customize whether pitchmarks and phone boundaries are
displayed in the editor:

  (set! *show-pitchmarks* #f)  ; don't display pitchmarks
  (set! *show-labels* #t)  ; display phone boundaries

Splitter operation can be adjusted using the following configuration variables:

  (set! *noise-level* 0.02)  ; noise level in silences, ranging from 0.0 to 1.0
  (set! *min-silence-length* 0.5)  ; minimum silence length in seconds

Read the source code to get information about other configuration variables.

* Usage

Fvoxedit consists of two main parts: The diphone database editor and the
recording splitter.

The recording splitter serves for splitting the initial recording to single
recorded words, within the places where silences are detected.  You can invoke
this facility from the menu item "Splitter/Identify Silences".  When the
silences are successfully identified, you can save the given parts by invoking
the "Splitter/Save Parts" menu item.  If the silences are identified very
incorrectly, you can try to adjust the Splitter configuration parameters
described above.  If there is only a few mistakes, you can adjust the marks
manually using usual Snd mark editing functions.

The diphone database editor allows you to change diphone boundaries, pitchmarks
and phone boundaries in the label files.  You start by loading a diphone file,
which can be performed in several ways:

- "Fvoxedit/Load diphone" menu item loads a given diphone.  The diphone can be
  specified either by its name, or by its file number.  This is the basic
  diphone loading command.

  Using file numbers is useful when you perform initial sequential database
  editing, especially in combination with the "Fvoxedit/Load Next Diphone"
  command, which loads the diphone from the file having the given number in its
  name.

- "Fvoxedit/Load all diphones" menu item loads all diphone files of a given
  diphone.  The diphone must be specified by its name.  This command is useful
  if you need to select the best diphone file from the available alternatives.

- "Fvoxedit/Load all diphone candidates" menu item loads not only diphones
  present in the dic file, but all matching phone pairs found in the label
  files.  This command is useful when all the diphone alternatives in the dic
  file are unsatisfactory and you try to find another alternative among the
  recorded words.

Once the diphone file is loaded, you can edit the marks in it.  Red marks are
diphone boundaries, blue marks are pitchmarks, green marks are phone boundaries
from the *.lab files.  You can toggle displaying pitchmarks and phone
boundaries using the "Fvoxedit/Toggle pitchmarks" and "Fvoxedit/Toggle labels"
menu commands.  You can play various parts of the sound file using the
"Fvoxedit/Play *" commands.

Marks can be moved in the common Snd way by dragging them with mouse.  But
usually you will probably use Fvoxedit commands:

- Middle mouse button moves the nearest mark (with the expeption of diphone
  boundaries) to the given place.

- Left side mouse button (button-7) moves the nearest mark on the left to the
  given place.

- Right side mouse button (button-8) moves the nearest mark on the right to the
  given place.

- Mouse wheel moves the nearest mark left or right.

- The "Fvoxedit/Align mid diphone mark with label" menu command moves the
  middle diphone boundary mark to the phone mark nearest to the current Snd
  cursor position.

- The "Fvoxedit/Center diphone boundary mark" menu command centres the left or
  right diphone boundary mark between the phone marks around the Snd cursor.

When you are finished with mark editing, you can save the changes using the
"Fvoxedit/Save" menu command.  The "Fvoxedit/Save as default" menu command
additionally makes the current diphone file to be the diphone default in the
dic file.

The following key bindings are available for all the menu commands:

  a ... align middle diphone mark to the phone boundary nearest to the current
        cursor position
  c ... center the nearest diphone mark between the phone boundaries around the
        current cursor position
  C ... load all corresponding phone pairs found in the label files
  d ... load given diphone file, which is the default in the dic file
  D ... load all diphone files of the given diphone present in the dic file
  i ... place initial pause phone mark 0.1 seconds before the first non-silence
        phone mark
  l ... toggle displaying phone boundaries from the label files
  n ... load the next diphone
  p ... toggle displaying pitchmarks
  s ... save changes
  S ... save changes and make the current diphone the default in the dic file
  t ... synthesize the sample via the Festival SayPhones function
  T ... synthesize the sample via the Festival SayPhones function and load it
  1 ... play the first part of the diphone
  2 ... play the second part of the diphone
  3 ... play the whole diphone
  4 ... play single phones separately
  5 ... play the phone where the cursor is placed

Please note the key bindings work in Snd only when a displayed sound curve is
focused.


-- Milan Zamazal <pdm@freebsoft.org>
